### Evaluation of paleomagnetic bias in Ediacaran global paleogeographic reconstructions
 
*Lei Wu, J. Brendan Murphy, R. Damian Nance*

**Abstract**

Paleogeographic reconstructions, often presented as black-box models of the paleo-locations of continents, are typically constructed by minimizing paleomagnetic bias while satisfying geologic constraints. Such paleogeographic models are created to fit some informed selection of paleomagnetic data, which is the only quantitative measure of continental paleo-position. However, underfitting of paleogeographic models, especially where paleomagnetic data are sparse, is potentially problematic as models may not capture apparent, ancient geomagnetic variations. Geologic observations such as paleoenvironmental, biogeographic and sedimentary provenance tracers are commonly used to justify underfitting (e.g. ignoring specific paleopoles), but can inadvertently result in paleogeographic models with large paleomagnetic bias. Furthermore, interpretations of geologic constraints are often equivocal or controversial, yielding multiple plausible continental paleo-positions. Using the different Ediacaran paleogeographic models as an example, each purported to satisfy first-order paleomagnetic and geologic (typically paleoenvironmental and tectonostratigraphic) constraints, we examine the paleomagnetic bias inherent in a selection of recently published models as a result of the subjective trade-off between paleomagnetic error and geological plausibility. We utilize a recent compilation of reliable Precambrian paleomagnetic data to quantify paleomagnetic bias in competing Ediacaran global reconstruction models. We quantify the extent of compliance with the paleomagnetic database by determining spherical arc distances between modeled paleo-positions of the geographic South Pole and reconstructed coordinates of all paleopoles from a continent acquired at various times. A reconstructed location of a continent is paleomagnetically biased if arc distances of the majority of high-quality paleopoles with reliable age constraints are greater than their standard errors at the 95% confidence interval. Our method provides a quantifiable measure of paleogeographic bias that allows researchers to make informed decisions when selecting among existing global models as a foundation for interpreting their geologic data.

**[Interactive Results](https://dash-app-ediacaran.herokuapp.com)**